### Introduction
To provide a robust platform for the exploration of single or multi-omic metabolic data in two-condition, multi-condition, and time-course contexts, we developed several computational features to address the aims discussed above. We developed a pattern search engine for the rapid and automated identification of different patterns and trends in omics data on the metabolic network. Metaboverse allows for the interactive exploration of specific reactions or reaction entities with on-the-fly pattern search analysis. The user can explore canonical pathways of interest and look for other interesting patterns and trends within these pathways. Perturbations in the abundance or behavior of a particular metabolic component can lead to downstream gene expression changes and other phenotypic modulations in a biological system. Users can therefore select a given component and explore the upstream and downstream reaction neighbors across the total reaction network. In addition, users can also use a drop-down menu to select any component and immediately view its reaction neighborhood. We also include an interactive perturbation exploration module, which displays all the perturbed reactions from the selected super-pathway. Finally, we tackle the challenge of sparsity, particularly in metabolomics datasets. We implement a reaction collapsing feature that can help the user identify more inconspicuous patterns across multiple reactions within the total reaction network.

### Results
We designed Metaboverse as a lightweight, self-contained, cross-platform app for the dynamic exploration of high-throughput biological data. The pathway curations are derived from Reactome [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz1031], coupled with additional metabolite synonym cross-referencing and mapping from the ChEBI [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1031] and Human Metabolome (HMDB) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1089] databases. As of the time of writing, Metaboverse is capable of analyzing data for over 90 species. A user begins by providing the desired output location for a new data model and specifying the organism of interest. If the user has previously curated data onto a reaction network for the selected organism of interest, they can alternatively provide this intermediate file. Next, the user provides the relevant transcriptomic, proteomic, and/or metabolomic datasets to layer onto the global reaction network of their organism of interest. Input data types can be extended to any dataset that uses the relevant mapping IDs; for example, one could provide ribosome profiling translation efficiency values mapped to the appropriate gene IDs for analysis upon the network. For each omics type, the user provides fold change and statistical values for each measurement. For example, if a user-provided data for a two-condition comparison transcriptomics dataset, these values would consist of log<sub>2</sub>(fold change) values between the experimental and control conditions, and the appropriate statistical values. As transcriptomics count data follows a negative binomial distribution, the appropriately adjusted p-values based on multiple hypothesis testing for this distribution should be used [@doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8, @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616]. For other omics types, these multiple hypothesis testing methods will vary based on the data distribution and other conventions. During the data input step, the user will also specify a few experimental parameters for consideration during downstream analysis and visualization. For example, users with gene expression data can choose to "broadcast" their measured gene values to the protein nodes where the appropriate protein values are missing. Following these user inputs, the organism's network is curated and the data is overlaid upon the network. A database file for the dataset is output for future analysis
